.\" Manpage for mpdris.
.\" Contact g1.jasger@gmail.com to correct errors or typos.
.TH MPDRIS 1 "2025\-06\-09" "mpdris 1.2.1" "mpdris man page"
.AU J. Gerhards
.SH NAME
mpdris \- a bridge between MPD and MPRIS for music control
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mpdris
.RB [ \-p\ \fI<port> ]
.RB [ \-a\ \fI<addr> ]
.RB [ \-r\ \fI<amount> ]
.RB [ \-\-config\ \fI<path> ]
.RB [ \-\-level\ \fI<level> ]
.RB [ \-\-daemon ]
.RB [ \-\-service ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
mpdris is a lightweight application that implements the media player D-Bus interface MPRIS for the Music Player Daemon (MPD).
This makes it possible to control your music through other software that implements the MPRIS standard (desktop environments and such).
.br
On startup mpdris first initializes the logging facility (logs to stdout).
Afterwards, mpdris looks for the configuration file
.RB (see\  FILES ).
If it cannot find it, it will start with the default values (or the ones given as arguments
.RB (see\  OPTIONS )).
and write the loaded values to the default location.
.br
Next, mpdris will connect to MPD; on a successful connection, it will then register a D-Bus interface.
If the name of the interface is already taken on the bus (for example, because another instance is already running), mpdris will immediately exit.
Otherwise, mpdris is then ready and will listen to interrupt signals.

mpdris will override the IP address and port over which to connect to MPD set in the config with the values of
.B $MPD_HOST
and
.BR $MPD_PORT ,
which itself will be overridden by the command line arguments.
.br
This creates the following order of importance, starting with the least and ending with the most important:
.br
\(em Config values
.br
\(em Environment variables
.br
\(em Command line arguments

.TP
Covers \- cover_directory & music_directory
mpdris will search the configured cover and music directory for image files that correspond to the currently playing song to display as cover art.

Paths will be searched in the following order, trying every extension before moving to the next one:
.br
\(em
.IR $cover_directory / $song_path / $filename \&. $ext
.br
\(em
.IR $cover_directory / $song_path / $parent_name \&. $ext
.br
\(em
.IR $music_directory / $song_path / $filename \&. $ext
.br
\(em
.IR $music_directory / $song_path /cover\&. $ext

.I $ext
can be one of the following values:
.BR jpg ,
.BR jpeg ,
.BR png ,
.BR webp ,
.BR avif ,
.BR jxl ,
.BR bmp ,
.BR gif ,
.BR heif
and
.BR heic .
.br
.I $song_path
is the file path in the music directory leading up to the current song.
.br
.I $parent_name
is the name of the parent directory of the current song.
.RI ( $parent_name
is excluded from
.I $song_path
when both are used)

Example:
.br
Let's say you have a user who stores their music in
.B ~/Music
and sets their
.B cover_directory
to be in
.BR ~/Pictures/songcovers .
.br
If they now play the song
.B Resurrections\&.mp3
located in
.BR ~/Music/Celeste ,
mpdris will search in
.B ~/Pictures/songcovers/Celeste/
for a file named
.B \%Resurrections
with one of the above-mentioned file extensions.
.br
If it cannot find it there, it will move to the next path.

If the song is located in a subdirectory of the music directory, you can name a cover file the same name as the directory
.RI (denoted\ as\  $parent_name\  above),
and it will be used for every song in that directory.
.br
So sticking with the example from above, mpdris will search for a file named
.B Celeste
in
.B cover_directory
with one of the above-listed extensions.
.br
If the song was one level deeper, so, for example,
.BR ~/Music/some/long/path/Celeste/Resurrections\&.mp3 ,
mpdris would look for the cover with this path:
.B ~/Pictures/songcovers/some/long/path/Celeste\&.\fI$ext
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX
.TP
.B mpdris
Start mpdris with the default settings, outputting logs to stdout/stderr
.TP
.BI mpdris\ -p\  6601\  -a\  192.168.1.10
Connect to MPD on the port \fI6601\fR over the IP address \fI192.168.1.10
.TP
.BI mpdris\ --retries\  5
Set attempts to reconnect to MPD to \fI5\fR before mpdris exits
.TP
.BI mpdris\ --config\  /home/johndoe/configs/mpdris.conf
Use a custom configuration file located at \fI/home/johndoe/configs/mpdris.conf
.TP
.BI mpdris\ --level\  debug
Run mpdris with the logging verbosity increased to the \fIdebug\fR level
.TP
.B mpdris --daemon
Run mpdris as a daemon in the background
.EE
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-v ,\  \-\-version
display the version and exit.
.TP
.BI \-p\  <port>\fR,\  \-\-port\  <port>
the port over which to connect to mpd.
.TP
.BI \-a\  <addr>\fR,\  \-\-addr\  <addr>
the ip address over which to connect to mpd.
.TP
.BI \-r\  <amount>\fR,\  \-\-retries\  <amount>
amount of times mpdris tries to reconnect to MPD before exiting.
.br
Set to \fB-1\fR to retry infinite times.
.TP
.BI \-\-config\  <path>
path to config file to use instead of the default.
.TP
.BI \-\-level\  <level>
the logging level/verbosity to use. May be one of:
.BR trace ,
.BR debug ,
.BR info ,
.BR warn ,
.BR error
.TP
.B \-\-daemon
When set, mpdris will try to fork into a daemon upon launch.
Additionally, mpdris will close stdout, stdin, and sterr.
.br
Upon receiving a
.B SIGHUP
signal, mpdris will reload the config.
.TP
.B \-\-service
should only be set when started through a systemd service.
.br
mpdris will try to load libsystemd in order to be able to notify systemd of its status.
Failing to find/load the library will result in mpdris immediately exiting.
.br
As with the
.B \-\-daemon
flag, upon receiving a
.B SIGHUP
signal, mpdris will reload the config.
.TP
.BR \-h ,\  \-\-help
display usage information
.SH EXIT STATUS
.IP "Status code: 0"
\(em When the
.B \-\-version
flag was given, after displaying the version
.br
\(em When the application exits gracefully after being given an exit signal
.br
\(em When the
.B \-\-daemon
flag was given, the parent process exits with status code 0 after the fork
.IP "Status code: 1"
\(em When failing to set up the signal handler
.br
\(em When failing to load the config
.br
\(em When receiving a
.B SIGQUIT
and failing to dump the core
.br
\(em When receiving a second exit signal while trying to shut down gracefully
.IP "Status code: 101"
\(em When
.B $HOME
is not set or contains non-UTF-8 characters
.br
\(em In the event, that the variable holding the config was written to before loading the config
.br
\(em When failing to load libsystemd
.br
\(em When failing to create a valid trackid path for the dbus interface
.br
\(em When an internal channel to notify of MPD changes gets closed
.br
\(em When failing to send an exit signal to itself after using all retries to connect to MPD
.br
\(em When failing to get the current UTC offset
.br
\(em When failing to set the logging facility
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HOME
Used to get the path of the configuration file when
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is not set
.RB (see\  FILES ).
.br
Additionally, paths beginning with tilde ('~')
in the config file are replaced with 
.BR $HOME .
.br
It is also used to set the default values for the
.BR music_dir\  and\  cover_dir\  (see\  FILES ).
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Used to get the path of the configuration file
.RB (see\  FILES ).
.TP
.B MPD_HOST
The host/IP address over which mpdris will try to connect to MPD.
In the case that a host instead of an IP address is given, mpdris will do a DNS lookup to resolve the address.

While
.B $MPD_HOST
overrides the
.B addr
value in the config, it does not override the command line arguments.
.TP
.B MPD_PORT
The port over which mpdris will try to connect to MPD.

While
.B $MPD_PORT
overrides the
.B port
value in the config, it does not override the command line arguments.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/mpdris/mpdris.conf\fR,\fI $HOME/.config/mpdris/mpdris.conf
The mpdris configuration file.
.br
The format and valid entries are detailed in
.MR mpdris\&.conf 5 .
.br
A sample config can be found in
.B /usr/share/doc/mpdris/sample.mpdris.conf
.TP
.I $HOME/Music
The default music directory
.RB (see\  DESCRIPTION ).
.br
The path can be changed in the configuration file (see
.MR mpdris\&.conf 5 ).
.TP
.I $HOME/Music/covers
The default cover directory
.RB (see\  DESCRIPTION ).
.br
The path can be changed in the configuration file (see
.MR mpdris\&.conf 5 ).
.SH STANDARDS
MPRIS D-Bus Interface Specification Version 2.2
.SH BUGS
Please report any issues and bugs to
.UR https://github.com/jasger9000/mpdris/issues
.UE
.SH AUTHORS
J. Gerhards (\c
.MT g1.jasger@gmail.com
.ME ")"
& Contributors

.UR https://github.com/jasger9000/mpdris/graphs/contributors
GitHub contributor graph
.UE
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR mpdris\&.conf 5 ,
.MR mpd 1
