.\" Manpage for the mpdris configuration file mpdris.conf.
.\" Contact g1.jasger@gmail.com to correct errors or typos.
.TH MPDRIS\&.CONF 5 "2025\-06\-09" "mpdris 1.2.1" "mpdris\&.conf man page"
.AU J. Gerhards
.SH NAME
mpdris\&.conf \- mpdris configuration file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.sp
$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/mpdris/mpdris\&.conf, $HOME/\&.config/mpdris/mpdris\&.conf

/usr/share/doc/mpdris/sample\&.mpdris\&.conf
.SH DESCRIPTION
mpdris\&.conf is the configuration file for
.BR mpdris (1).
If not specified as a command line argument, mpdris searches for it at
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/mpdris/mpdris\&.conf\fR,
if
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is defined. If not, mpdris will instead look at
.B $HOME/\&.config/mpdris/mpdris\&.conf\fR.
.br
If it also can't find it there, it will load the default values and write them to the selected location.

The configuration is written in the TOML format, meaning:
.br
# This is a comment

this_is_a_value = 6600

[section]
.br
key = "and this is a value in a section" # this is also a valid comment

For settings that specify a file path, the tilde ('~') is expanded to
.B $HOME\fR.
In addition, names starting with a dollar sign ('$') are treated as environment variables, like regular shell escaping.
.br
Note: The brace syntax
.RI (${ varname })
is, as of v1\&.2\&.0 not supported.

See
.B /usr/share/doc/mpdris/sample\&.mpdris\&.conf
for an example configuration.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI addr\fR\ =\ \(dq <address>\fR\(dq
The IP address that MPD runs on.
While this can be a different machine than your own, this is very unlikely,
so in almost every case you can just leave it as the default value.

Default:
.B \(dq127.0.0.1\(dq
.TP
.BI port\fR\ =\  <port>
The TCP port that MPD listens on for its API.
.br
Can be configured in
.BR mpd\&.conf ,
MPD defaults to
.BR 6600 .

Default:
.B 6600
.TP
.BI retries\fR\ =\  <amount>
The amount of times to retry to get a connection to MPD before exiting

Default:
.B 3
.TP
.BI music_directory\fR\ =\ \(dq <path>\fR\(dq
The root directory where your music is stored and is configured in
.BR mpd\&.conf .
It is very likely that this is just
.BR ~/Music .
.br
This directory will additionally be used to search for covers; for more information, see the
.B DESCRIPTION
section in
.MR mpdris 1 .

Default:
.B \(dq~/Music\(dq
.TP
.BI cover_directory\fR\ =\ \(dq <path>\fR\(dq
The dedicated directory to where your covers are stored.
.br
For more information, see the
.B DESCRIPTION
section in
.MR mpdris 1 .

Default:
.B \(dq~/Music/covers\(dq
.SH STANDARDS
Tom's Obvious, Minimal Language (TOML)
.SH BUGS
Please report any issues and bugs to
.UR https://github.com/jasger9000/mpdris/issues
.UE
.SH AUTHORS
J. Gerhards (\c
.MT g1.jasger@gmail.com
.ME ")"
& Contributors

.UR https://github.com/jasger9000/mpdris/graphs/contributors
GitHub contributor graph
.UE
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR mpdris 1 ,
.MR mpd\&.conf 5 ,
.MR mpd 1
